Doc/syntax (#576)
tweag/nickel: doc/manual/syntax.md

# Nickel Syntax

> ## Simple types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Simple values
```

> There are tree basic kind of values in Nickel : 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are three basic kind of values in Nickel : 
```

Examples:

```
1
0.543
42
-1000000
-6.8
```

There are a some predefined operators for working with numbers :
| Operator | Description                                          | Example       |
|:--------:|:----------------------------------------------------:|:-------------:|
| +        | The addition operator                                | `1 + 2 = 3`   |
| \-       | The subtraction operator                             | `1 - 2 = -1`  |
| *        | The multiplication operator                          | `1 * 2 = 2`   |
| /        | The division operator                                | `1 / 2 = 0.5` |
| %        | The modulo operator (returns the *signed* remainder) | `5 % 3 = 2`   |

Numbers are also comparable, using the dedicated comparison operators, returning a boolean value :
| Operator | Description      | Example   |
|:--------:|:----------------:|:---------:|
| ==       | Equal            | `5 == 5`  |
| !=       | Not Equal        | `5 != 4`  |
| <        | Smaller than     | `2 < 3`   |
| >        | Greater than     | `1 > -5`  |
| >=       | Greater or Equal | `1 >= 1`  |
| <=       | Smaller or Equal | `-1 <= 6` |

> 

Reviewer: It might be important to underline here that because we allow `-` (dash) in identifiers, you must always put space around subtraction. That is, `a-b` is parsed as the identifier `a-b`, not the subtraction. One must write `a - b`.

Author: added note

> 

Reviewer: We should maybe talk about operator precedence. Or have a table at the end. Even then, recalling the precedence of `+`, `*` and `/`  here may be a good idea.

Author: added

### Boolean values

The boolean values in Nickel are denoted `true` and `false`.

> To work with boolean values, we have a the classic logical operators *AND* (&&), *OR* (||) and *NOT* (!).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To work with boolean values, we have the classic logical operators *AND* (&&), *OR* (||) and *NOT* (!).
```

The _AND_ and _OR_ operators are lazy in the evaluation of the second argument. The truth table below gives the results for using these operators:

Examples:
```
> true && false
false

> false || true
true

> ! true
false

> ```

Reviewer: Same, something about `&&` taking precedence over `||` could be nice.

Author: added

### Strings

Nickel can work with sequences of characters, or strings. 
Strings are enclosed by `" ... "` for a single line string or by `m#" ... "#m` for a multiline string.
They can be concatenated with the operator `++`.
Strings must be UTF-8 valid.

Examples:
```
> "Hello, World!"
"Hello, World!"

> m#"Well, if this isn't a multiline string?
Yes it is, indeed it is"#m
"Well, if this isn't a string?
Yes it is, indeed it is"

> "Hello" ++ "World"
"HelloWorld"
```

## Equality Operators

> We have seen that the operators `==` and `!=` works for comparing numbers, but they can actually compare any values together. Two values are equal if they have the same _type_ and the same _value_.

Reviewer: Saying that "two values are equal if they have the same value" is slightly tautological, even if I see where you are coming from. Maybe getting rid of the `and the same _value_`, and add rather something more explicit about `==` not doing implicit conversions? If that's the point you want to make.

Examples:
```
> 1 == 1
true

> 5 == 5.0
true

> "Hello" == "Hello"
true

> "Hello" != "World"
true

> 5 == "Hello"
false

> true == "true"
false
```

> ## Composite types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Composite values
```
You start with `values`, which is a good idea, because in a typed language `type` already means something. So better to stick to it.

### List

> Lists allows grouping of values into sequences. They are delimited by `[` and `]`, and elements are separated with `,`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A list is a sequence of values. They are delimited by `[` and `]`, and elements are separated with `,`.
```

Examples:
```
[1, 2, 3]
["Hello", "World"]
[1, true, "true"]
[]
```

Lists can be concatenated with the operator `@`:
```
> [1] @ [2, 3]
[ 1, 2, 3 ]
```

### Record

> Records are key-value storage. They are delimited with by `{` and `}`, elements are separated by `,`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Records are key-value storage. They are delimited by `{` and `}`, and elements are separated by `,`.
```

> Records are key-value storage. They are delimited with by `{` and `}`, elements are separated by `,`.

Reviewer: You should probably introduce the word `field`. This is the one used in most of the code/documentation.

> key-value elements are noted as `key = value`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key-value elements are noted as `key = value`.
```

> The keys can be either identifiers, or strings. Values can be of any type.

Reviewer: Pedantically, all keys are strings. However they can be written like identifiers, or escaped if needed. I'm sorry, this is not a great way of saying it either, but the current sentence feels like strings and identifiers are two different, separate kind of keys.

Author: rephrased

Elements inside a record are unordered.

Examples:
```
{}
{a = 3}
{my_id_n5 = "my id number 5", my_id_n4 = }
{"5" = 5, six = 6}
```

> A record cannot contain the same key twice, or the values must be identical (see section about _merge_).

Reviewer: That's true for primitive values, but not for records. For example `{foo = {bar = 1}, foo = {baz = 2}}` is totally fine, and is what `{foo.bar = 1, foo.baz = 2}` is desugared to. You can either say that exactly (primitive values must be the same, but records are treated differently) or totally offload the discussion to the merging section, just saying that multiple definitions are merged.

Author: removed the section, the reader should read the documentation about merge.

```
> {a = 3, a = 3}
{ a = 3 }

> {a = 3, "a" = 3}

> { a = 3 }

Reviewer: maybe add an example of something that fails?

Author: section was removed

```

Accessing a record field can be done using the `.` operator :
```
> { a = 1, b = 5 }.a
1

> { a = 1 }.b
error: Missing field

> { "1" = "one" }."1"
"one"
```

> 

Reviewer: This section could have too:

- the definition by pieces syntax, like `{foo.bar.baz = value}`. This is desguared to `{foo = {bar = {baz = value}}}`. As mentioned above, you can define one same record in several pieces: `{foo.bar = 1, foo.baz = 2}`. The two desugared versions of `foo` will be then merged.
- metadata. Or this may be a different section, but we must have that the `|` operator is used to attach metadata to values. And list the one available: contract annotation (without keyword), `doc`, `default`.
- merging. We won't define it there, but just says that `&` recursively merge records, and point to the relevant section.

Author: done

## Statements

### If-Then-Else
This statement allows conditional branching in your code. You can use it as `if <bool expr> then <expr> else <expr>`. Both expressions in the `then` and `else` branches are lazily evaluated, and must have the same type.

Examples:
```
> if true then "TRUE :)" else "false :("
"TRUE :)"

> if false then "Not this one" else "This one"
"This one"

> if "forty-two" == 42 then "equal?" else "unequal"
"unequal"
```

### Let-In
Let-in allows the binding of an expression. It is used as `let <ident> = <expr> in <expr>`.

Examples:
```
> let r = { a = "a", b = "b" } in r.a
"a"

> let inner = { inside = true } in let outer = { outside = inner.inside } in outer.outside
true

> let a = 1 in let b = 2 in a + b
3
```

The identifier in the `let` part can be typed (more about typing in the dedicated document):
```
> let a : Num = 6 in 6 * 7
42

> ```

Reviewer: I'm not sure this should be in the let section. The thing is, any value can have a type annotation `5 : Num`. Then, any *binding* (record fields and let) have this syntactic sugar `let foo : Type = ...` or `{foo : Type = ...}` as syntactic sugar for respectively `let foo = (... : Type)` and `{foo = (... : Type)}`. It could be in a separate section "Annotations" or something, together with metavalues.

Author: Moved typing to its own section

|       `+`, `-`       | left-to-right | binary addition and subtraction               |
| `<`, `>`, `=<`, `>=` | left-to-right |                                               |
|      `==`, `!=`      | left-to-right |                                               |

### Boolean values

The boolean values in Nickel are denoted `true` and `false`.

To work with boolean values, we have the classic logical operators *AND* (&&), *OR* (||) and *NOT* (!).
The _AND_ and _OR_ operators are lazy in the evaluation of the second argument. The truth table below gives the results for using these operators:

Examples:
```
> true && false
false

> false || true
true

> ! true
false
```

### Strings

Nickel can work with sequences of characters, or strings. 
Strings are enclosed by `" ... "` for a single line string or by `m#" ... "#m` for a multiline string.
They can be concatenated with the operator `++`.
Strings must be UTF-8 valid.

String interpolation exists in Nickel, via the notation `"#{ < expression that evaluates to a string > }"`.

Examples:
```
> "Hello, World!"
"Hello, World!"

> m#"Well, if this isn't a multiline string?
Yes it is, indeed it is"#m
"Well, if this isn't a string?

> Yes it is, indeed it is"

Reviewer: It could be nice to have multiline strings inside indented code, to see the difference:
```
{
  program = {
    shell_code = m#"
      if [ -f /var/log/messages ]; then
          echo "/var/log/messages exists."
      fi
    "#m
  }
}
```
then `program.shell_code` is:
```
"if [ -f /var/log/messages ]; then
  echo "/var/log/messages exists."
fi"

Author: added an example

> "Hello" == "Hello"
true

> "Hello" != "World"
true

> 5 == "Hello"
false

> true == "true"
false
```

## Composite values

### List
A list is a sequence of values. They are delimited by `[` and `]`, and elements are separated with `,`.

Examples:
```
[1, 2, 3]
["Hello", "World"]
[1, true, "true"]
[]
```

Lists can be concatenated with the operator `@`:
```
> [1] @ [2, 3]
[ 1, 2, 3 ]
```

### Record
Records are key-value storage, or in Nickel terms, field-value storage. They are delimited by `{` and `}`, and elements are separated by `,`.
Field-value elements are noted as `field = value`.
The fields are strings, but can be noted as identifiers if they respect identifiers syntax (internally, they will be stored as strings). Values can be of any type.
Elements inside a record are unordered.
Two records can be _merged_ together using the operator `&`. The reader can find more information about merging in the relevant documentation.

Examples:
```
{}
{a = 3}
{my_id_n5 = "my id number 5", my_id_n4 = }
{"5" = 5, six = 6}
```

Accessing a record field can be done using the `.` operator :
```
> { a = 1, b = 5 }.a
1

> { a = 1 }.b
error: Missing field

> { "1" = "one" }."1"
"one"
```

> It is possible to write records of records via the *pieces syntax*, where we separate fields by dots:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to write records of records via the *piecewise syntax*, where we separate fields by dots:
```

```
> { a = { b = 1 } }
{ a = { b = 1 } }
 
> { a.b = 1 }
{ a = { b = 1 } }

> { a.b = 1, a.c = 2, b = 3}
{ a = { b = 1, c = 2 }, b = 3 }
```

> ## Statements

Reviewer: There is no statement in Nickel, everything is an expression. Control-flow maybe? But `let .. in ..` is arguably not control flow. Maybe just `Constructs`, or something vague and general enough? Blocks?

Author: Constructs seems good for me, I'll use it.

### If-Then-Else

> This statement allows conditional branching in your code. You can use it as `if <bool expr> then <expr> else <expr>`. Both expressions in the `then` and `else` branches are lazily evaluated, and must have the same type.

Reviewer: What do you mean by `lazily evaluated`? If the `else` is evaluated even when the condition is `false`, then I guess it's not really an `if-then-else`.

Author: I have no idea what you don't understand here. I will rephrase, but I'm not sure it will be better...

Reviewer: Sorry, my comment is not very clear. My question is: is the "lazy evaluated" part meaningful or useful? What would be an `if-then-else` that is not  "lazy", in another language?

Examples:
```
> if true then "TRUE :)" else "false :("
"TRUE :)"

> if false then "Not this one" else "This one"
"This one"

> if "forty-two" == 42 then "equal?" else "unequal"
"unequal"

> ```

Reviewer: Could add an example showing that `if` is an expression (there is no statement in Nickel), like
```
>["1"] @ (if 42 == "42" then ["3"] else ["2"]) @ ["3"]
["1", "2", "3"]
```

Author: I shamelessly cut/paste your example.

### Let-In
Let-in allows the binding of an expression. It is used as `let <ident> = <expr> in <expr>`.

Examples:
```
> let r = { a = "a", b = "b" } in r.a
"a"

> let inner = { inside = true } in let outer = { outside = inner.inside } in outer.outside
true

> let a = 1 in let b = 2 in a + b
3
```

## Functions
A function is declared using the `fun` keyword, then arguments separated by spaces, and finally an arrow `=>` to add the body of the function.
To call a function, just add the arguments after it separated with spaces.
Functions in Nickel are curried, meaning that a function taking multiple arguments is actually a function that takes a single argument and returns a function taking the rest of the arguments, until it is applied.

Example
```
> (fun a b => a + b) 1 2
3

let add = fun a b => a + b in add 1 2
3

> let add = fun a b => a + b in
    let add1 = add 1 in
        add1 2
3
```

> 

Reviewer: Should also talk about the curried operator syntax. For each infix operator `+`, `-`, `@`, etc. there is an associated function `(op)`, such as `(@)`, and `(+)` that turns it into a function. It can be (partially) applied and passed as a function:

```
>let plus_one = (+) 1 in
let times_two = (*) 2 in
plus_one (times_two 2)
5

>let flatten = lists.fold (@) [] in
flatten [[1,2], [3,4]]
[ 1, 2, 3, 4 ]
```

We can also introduce the reverse application operator `|>` here. `x |> f` is `f x`. It is left associative, such that `x |> f |> g` is `g (f  x)`. It is useful to chain operations on a value:

```
[1,2,3,4,5,6]
|> lists.map ((+) 1)
|> lists.filter ((<=) 5) // this is fun x =>  5 <= x, so elements GREATER than 5
|> lists.elem_at 0
// 5
```

Author: I didn't know they existed, this is so cool

Reviewer: Yes, this is why this is a good thing you're writing this document :slightly_smiling_face: the knowledge won't be hidden in the code and our heads anymore. This syntax exists in other ML descendants, like Haskell and OCaml.

## Typing
To give a type to a value, we write it with `< value > : < type >`.
More information on typing in the relevant document.

Examples:
```
5 : Num
"Hello" : Str

(fun a b => a + b) : Num -> Num -> Num
let add : Num -> Num -> Num = fun a b => a + b

{a: Num = 1, b: Bool = true, c : List Num = [ 1 ]}
let r : {a : Num, b : Bool, c : List Num} = { a = 1, b = true, c = [ 1 ] }

{ a = 1, b = 2 } : { _ : Num }
let r : { _ : Num } = { a = 1, b = 2 }
```

## Metadata

> Metadata can be used to add contracts (more information in relevant documentation), documentation or default values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metadata are used to attach contracts (more information in relevant documentation), documentation or priority to values.
```

> It is introduced with a `|`. Multiple metadata can be chained.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A metadata is introduced with the syntax `<value> | <metadata>`. Multiple metadata can be chained.
```

> For adding a regular type as contract, the syntax is `| < type >`. For a defined contract, we use the `| #< defined type >`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I think we can just get rid of this one, since this won't be true anymore once we have merged the type and contract syntax.

Examples:
```
> 5 | Num
5

> 5 | Bool
error: Blame error: contract broken by a value.

> let SmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x < 5) in 1 | #SmallNum
1

> let SmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x < 5) in 10 | #SmallNum
error: Blame error: contract broken by a value.

> let SmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x < 5) in
    let NotTooSmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x >= 2) in
        3 | Num | #SmallNum | #NotTooSmallNum
3
```

> Adding documentation can be done with `| doc < a string >`.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding documentation can be done with `| doc < string >`.  
```

Examples:
```
> 5 | doc "The number five"
5

> true | Bool | doc m#"
    If something is true,
    it is based on facts rather than being invented or imagined,
    and is accurate and reliable.
    (Collins dictionary)
    "#m
true
```

> Default values are used for records contracts, to give a default values to fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Record contracts can set default values using the `default` metadata:
```

It is noted as `| default = < default value >`.  
Examples:
```
> let Ais2ByDefault = { a | default = 2 } in {} | #Ais2ByDefault
{ a = 2 }

> let Ais2ByDefault = { a | default = 2 } in { a = 1 } | #Ais2ByDefault
{ a = 1 }

> ```

Reviewer: Could add an example of the usage of default values for merging/overriding:
```
> {foo | default = 1, bar = foo + 1} & {foo = 2}
{foo = 2, bar = 3}

Author: @yannham I thought about this, but I have the impression this is out of scope for the syntax document.

Reviewer: Mmh. What about just putting the example, but without explaining it further? The idea is be to reflect how `default` can be encountered in the wild, but deferring any deep explanation to the relevant manual section?

|     `*`, `/`, `%`    | left-to-right |                                               |
|       `+`, `-`       | left-to-right | binary addition and subtraction               |
| `<`, `>`, `=<`, `>=` | left-to-right |                                               |
|      `==`, `!=`      | left-to-right |                                               |

### Boolean values

The boolean values in Nickel are denoted `true` and `false`.

Nickel features the classical boolean operators *AND* (&&), *OR* (||) and *NOT* (!).
The _AND_ and _OR_ operators are lazy in the evaluation of the second argument: for example, in `exp1 && exp2`, `exp2` is only evaluated if `exp1` evaluates to `false`.

Examples:
```
> true && false
false

> false || true
true

> ! true
false
```

### Strings

Nickel can work with sequences of characters, or strings. 
Strings are enclosed by `" ... "` for a single line string or by `m#" ... "#m` for a multiline string.
They can be concatenated with the operator `++`.
Strings must be UTF-8 valid.

The string interpolation syntax is `"#{ < expression that evaluates to a string > }"`.

Examples:
```
> "Hello, World!"
"Hello, World!"

> > m#"Well, if this isn't a multiline string?

Author: I already evoke multiline strings above, so it seems normal I give a small example ?

> > m#"Well, if this isn't a multiline string?

Reviewer: Oh right, I thought they were only introduced for the first time later. Then one possibility is to make a first paragraph mentioning only strings, and in a second step talk about multiline strings. It just felt slightly odd to mention them and give a first example but without really knowing what they are about, and then actually explain what they are for. But it's my very arbitrary opinion. You can also keep it as it is, if you prefer to. Examples usually don't hurt

"Hello World"
```

Multiline strings are "indentation-aware". This means that one could use an indented string interpolation and the indentation would behave as expected:
```
> let log = m#"
if log:
  print("log:", s)
"#m in m#"
def concat(str_list, log=false):
  res = []
  for s in str_list:
    #{log}
    res.append(s)
  return res
"#m
"def concat(str_list, log=false):
  res = []
  for s in str_list:
    if log:
      print("log:", s)
    res.append(s)
  return res"
```

## Equality Operators

We have seen that the operators `==` and `!=` works for comparing numbers, but they can actually compare any values together. To be equal, except for the obvious equality on values, elements must have the same type.

Examples:
```
> 1 == 1
true

> 5 == 5.0
true

> "Hello" == "Hello"
true

> "Hello" != "World"
true

> 5 == "Hello"
false

> true == "true"
false
```

## Composite values

### List
A list is a sequence of values. They are delimited by `[` and `]`, and elements are separated with `,`.

Examples:
```
[1, 2, 3]
["Hello", "World"]
[1, true, "true"]
[]
```

Lists can be concatenated with the operator `@`:
```
> [1] @ [2, 3]
[ 1, 2, 3 ]
```

### Record

> Records are key-value storage, or in Nickel terms, field-value storage. They are delimited by `{` and `}`, and elements are separated by `,`.

Author: @yannham Why do you prefer "with" to "by" in this case ?

> Records are key-value storage, or in Nickel terms, field-value storage. They are delimited by `{` and `}`, and elements are separated by `,`.

Reviewer: I did a shallow google search and both seemed to be totally valid in this case, so the choice was quite arbitrary, to be honest. Picking `by` is totally fine if you prefer to. The suggestion is to pick one and use it consistently across this document.

> Records are key-value storage, or in Nickel terms, field-value storage. They are delimited by `{` and `}`, and elements are separated by `,`.

Author: Okay, then I will change it everywhere, with the almighty power of sed

Field-value elements are noted as `field = value`.
The fields are strings, but can be noted as identifiers if they respect identifiers syntax (internally, they will be stored as strings). Values can be of any type.
Elements inside a record are unordered.
Two records can be _merged_ together using the operator `&`. The reader can find more information about merging in the relevant documentation.

Examples:
```
{}
{a = 3}

> {my_id_n5 = "my id number 5", my_id_n4 = }

Author: oopsie

{"5" = 5, six = 6}
```

Accessing a record field can be done using the `.` operator :
```
> { a = 1, b = 5 }.a
1

> { a = 1 }.b
error: Missing field

> { "1" = "one" }."1"
"one"
```

It is possible to write records of records via the *piecewise syntax*, where we separate fields by dots:
```
> { a = { b = 1 } }
{ a = { b = 1 } }
 
> { a.b = 1 }
{ a = { b = 1 } }

> { a.b = 1, a.c = 2, b = 3}
{ a = { b = 1, c = 2 }, b = 3 }
```

Since all fields are strings, we can use string interpolation to create keys or accessing:
```
> let k = "a" in { "#{k}" = 1 }
{ a = 1 }

> let k = "a" in { a = 1 }."#{k}"
1
```

## Constructs

### If-Then-Else
This construct allows conditional branching in your code. You can use it as `if <bool expr> then <expr> else <expr>`.

Examples:
```
> if true then "TRUE :)" else "false :("
"TRUE :)"

> if false then "Not this one" else "This one"
"This one"

> if "forty-two" == 42 then "equal?" else "unequal"
"unequal"

> ["1"] @ (if 42 == "42" then ["3"] else ["2"]) @ ["3"]
["1", "2", "3"]
```

> The `then` and `else` branches are only evaluated accordingly to the result of the expression inside the `if`.

Reviewer: Sorry to insist, but I still don't understand the why of this paragraph. To me it is the very definition of an if-then-else, and as such it is obvious. Unless I'm misunderstanding something? What point do you want to make here, that would be true for Nickel but not for other languages?

Author: I don't see why it is obvious, especially for a configuration language, that someone might use without any prior knowledge of programming.

Author: meh, removed anyway

["1", "2", "3"]

> ["1"] @ (if false then ["2"] else "error") @ ["3"]    // Here only the expression in 'else' is evaluated, which results in a type error
error: Type error
```

### Let-In
Let-in allows the binding of an expression. It is used as `let <ident> = <expr> in <expr>`.

Examples:
```
> let r = { a = "a", b = "b" } in r.a
"a"

> let inner = { inside = true } in let outer = { outside = inner.inside } in outer.outside
true

> let a = 1 in let b = 2 in a + b
3
```

## Functions
A function is declared using the `fun` keyword, then arguments separated by spaces, and finally an arrow `=>` to add the body of the function.
To call a function, just add the arguments after it separated with spaces.
Functions in Nickel are curried, meaning that a function taking multiple arguments is actually a function that takes a single argument and returns a function taking the rest of the arguments, until it is applied.

Examples:
```
> (fun a b => a + b) 1 2
3

let add = fun a b => a + b in add 1 2
3

> let add = fun a b => a + b in
    let add1 = add 1 in
        add1 2
3
```

> All existing infix operators in Nickel can be turned into prefix functions by putting them inside parentheses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All existing infix operators in Nickel can be turned into functions by putting them inside parentheses.
```
I see what you mean, but to someone especially into parsing or PL (which Nickel users may be), it may sound a bit strange, as if we now have different types of functions, prefix functions, and other. At this point, I think it sufficient and clearer to just say this turns operators into functions.

Examples:
```
> 1 + 2
3

> (+) 1 2
3

> let increment = fun n => (+) 1 n in
    increment 41
42

> let increment = (+) 1 in
    increment 41
42

> let flatten = lists.fold (@) [] in flatten [[1, 2], [3], [4, 5]]
[ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 ]
```

Functions might be composed using the *pipe operator*. The pipe operator allows for a function application `f x` to be written as `x |> f`.
This operator is left-associative, so `x |> f |> g` will be interpreted as `g (f x)`.

Examples:
```
> "Hello World" |> strings.split " "
["Hello", "World"]

> > "Hello World" |> strings.split " " |> lists.head

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> "Hello World"
  |> strings.split " "
  |> lists.head
```

"Hello"

> > "Hello World" |> strings.split " " |> lists.head |> strings.uppercase

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> "Hello World"
  |> strings.split " "
  |> lists.head
  |> strings.uppercase
```

"HELLO"
```

## Typing
To give a type to a value, we write it with `< value > : < type >`.
More information on typing in the relevant document.

Examples:
```
5 : Num
"Hello" : Str

(fun a b => a + b) : Num -> Num -> Num
let add : Num -> Num -> Num = fun a b => a + b

{a: Num = 1, b: Bool = true, c : List Num = [ 1 ]}
let r : {a : Num, b : Bool, c : List Num} = { a = 1, b = true, c = [ 1 ] }

{ a = 1, b = 2 } : { _ : Num }
let r : { _ : Num } = { a = 1, b = 2 }
```

## Metadata
Metadata are used to attach contracts (more information in relevant documentation), documentation or priority to values.
A metadata is introduced with the syntax `<value> | <metadata>`. Multiple metadata can be chained.

Examples:
```
> 5 | Num
5

> 5 | Bool
error: Blame error: contract broken by a value.

> > let SmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x < 5) in 1 | #SmallNum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> let SmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x < 5) in
1 | #SmallNum
```

1

> > let SmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x < 5) in 10 | #SmallNum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> let SmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x < 5) in
10 | #SmallNum
```

error: Blame error: contract broken by a value.

> let SmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x < 5) in

>     let NotTooSmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x >= 2) in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  let NotTooSmallNum = contracts.from_predicate (fun x => x >= 2) in
```

>         3 | Num | #SmallNum | #NotTooSmallNum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  3 | Num
    | #SmallNum
    | #NotTooSmallNum
```

3
```

Adding documentation can be done with `| doc < string >`.  
Examples:
```
> 5 | doc "The number five"
5

> true | Bool | doc m#"
    If something is true,
    it is based on facts rather than being invented or imagined,
    and is accurate and reliable.
    (Collins dictionary)
    "#m
true
```

Record contracts can set default values using the `default` metadata:
It is noted as `| default = < default value >`.
This is especially useful when merging records (more about this in the dedicated document about merge).  
Examples:
```

> > let Ais2ByDefault = { a | default = 2 } in {} | #Ais2ByDefault

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> let Ais2ByDefault = { a | default = 2 } in
  {} | #Ais2ByDefault
```

{ a = 2 }

> > let Ais2ByDefault = { a | default = 2 } in { a = 1 } | #Ais2ByDefault

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> let Ais2ByDefault = { a | default = 2 } in
  { a = 1 } | #Ais2ByDefault
```

{ a = 1 }

> { foo | default = 1, bar = foo + 1 }
{ foo = 1, bar = 2 }

> > {foo | default = 1, bar = foo + 1} & {foo = 2} {foo = 2, bar = 3}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> {foo | default = 1, bar = foo + 1} & {foo = 2}
```
